Today I'm interviewing Casey Hammer.
Casey has worked on a bunch of cool
things. Um, Caltech PhD on some
gravitational wave black hole gimmick
stuff, then Hyperloop, then the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory at NASA, and now
he is founder and CEO of Terraform
Industries. Casey, welcome.
>> Thank you. It's great to be here
finally.
>> Big picture question I'm interested in
to the extent that AI just ends up being
this big industrial race. Who can build
the most solar panels? Who can build the
most batteries? who can build the most
GPUs and um transmission lines and
transformers and etc etc.
>> This is not what the US is known for at
least in recent decades. This is exactly
what China is known for right where they
have like 20x the amount of yearly solar
uh manufacturing the US has. Obviously
we have export controls right now but
over time SMIC will catch up to TSMC's
leading edge. So what is a story exactly
of how the United States wins this? Like
why does China just not win by default?
>> Do you think that China is better at
capital allocation in the United States?
Do you think the Chinese business
environment is better for business than
in the United States?
>> Every first principles argument about
these other industries where they're
killing it, but like doesn't seem to
have hampered BYD.
>> Well, people say, "Oh, look, they're so
much better at building highspeed trains
than the United States." Right.
>> Right. I would never like hold up a flag
saying I'm really good at building
highspeed trains. Like that is just a
sign that you're really bad at capital
allocation. Like why would you devote in
2025 so much industrial effort and
money, right? They're devoting a lot to
solar over capacity which in your
opinion is the key to future industrial
growth.
>> Accidentally correct.
>> They call the most important thing
correct, right? Which should account for
something.
>> Well, they're in a similar situation to
Europe, but unlike the United States.
So, the United States is is the luckiest
goddamn country on earth because it's
surrounded on two sides by oceans and on
the other two sides by like friendly
allies, right? China is surrounded by 15
countries who are mostly hostile to it,
right? with no good like mountain ranges
or rivers or anything to really separate
them. And then they get all their oil,
almost all their oil from the Middle
East, right in countries that they don't
control, don't have strong diplomatic
relationships with on fleets of oil
tankers that they can't defend because
their navy doesn't have the ability to
to operate effectively in the Indian
Ocean.
>> But but you're working on this, right?
If if you get synthetic fuels working on
terror,
>> personally, yes.
>> Doesn't that asymmetrically help China,
which might be fine? Like
>> it does. It absolutely asymmetrically
helps China. We're not currently working
with China. They don't plan to, but like
the physics is very obvious, you know,
and synthetic fuels have been around for
100 years. Like there are projects in
China right now working on synthetic
fuels. It would not surprise me if they
were thinking pretty seriously about
this.
>> Just to throw out for the audience, if
China has all this electricity
production and the bottleneck is that
only a third of final energy use in a
modern economy comes from electricity.
The rest you need gas and whatever to
transport things
>> or coal. They use a lot of coal,
>> right? And what Casey is inventing is a
technology to turn that electricity
which only can supply a third of end
uses right now into synthetic fuels
which can supply 100% of the electricity
your civilization needs. So then China's
energy advantage then becomes
overwhelming.
>> This this technology levels the playing
field. It levels the playing field a
lot.
>> Right. But at the end of the day, you
know, China still contains the poorest
Chinese people anywhere on Earth,
>> right? Right. I mean,
>> never never underestimate the capacity
for an autocratic dictatorship to shoot
itself in the foot.
>> I don't know. I I whenever I I agree
that they've obviously made bad
decisions, but even if you have the
poorest Chinese people anywhere in the
world, they can still be quite rich. You
know, like Singapore's rich or whatever.
Yeah.
>> Um, also, there's parts of China which
actually contain quite rich Chinese
people.
>> So, you had to compare not all of China
against the US, but Shanghai and
Guangdong against the United States. So
you can have a part of China that is as
big as America and as wealthy as America
and as in innovative as America
>> like the Indian middle class is larger
than the US middle class
>> but also it's not it's not nowhere near
as wealthy whereas in there are parts of
China which are humongous which are
actually as wealthy as the United States
and in many cases as innovative etc.
>> Yeah.
>> No I'm saying don't underestimate it but
at the same time like you know we want
to find the truth here right and and the
truth is like we should not count the
United States out of the battle and just
give up. We're very much still in the
race now provided we don't you know take
extra effort to shoot ourselves in the
foot.
>> So right now um we are export
controlling chips for the purpose of we
wanted to keep our AI lead or stay in
the lead in AI and we recognize this is
a key input in our ability to compete in
AI. So we are going to export control
China's ability to have these ships.
>> Um
>> energy is also a key input in this AI
race. And if China wanted to do the
converse of what we're doing to them
with these cheap imports, what they
would do to us is to export control
solar and batteries, um,
>> it would be asymmetrical. It would hurt
them worse than us
>> if they deter us.
>> Yeah. Well, China obviously depends upon
like the US export market for its
economic dynamism, right? And and the
United States, it would it's going to
hurt both parties to like sever that
link. But if you se the link completely,
China's ability to make uh advanced
chips right now is like basically not
there. Whereas the United States can
make them and United States ability to
make solar arrays is embionic, but it's,
you know, it's actually not that far
behind China's, right? It's maybe 5
years behind.
>> If if we decided we want to produce 100
gawatt of solar capacity every single
year,
>> we're already on track to do that.
>> Okay. Is it going to be as cheap as it
is to do in China?
>> Um my my views on this are somewhat
different from the mainstream, which is
great cuz this is podcast. Um, so the
mainstream view would say, well, China
has cheaper labor, which is no longer
true, uh, say compared to Mexico, and
it's got lower environmental
regulations, uh, which is true, and that
it is more businessfriendly, which is
absolutely crazy. I've never heard like
there's there's no way you could justify
that like your company having to have a
like an inspector from the CCP on its
board who like harasses you about
Xiinping every day, like helps you do
your business. Um, and and also like the
rule of law is not great. So like you're
constantly having to pay bribes to
people in order to stay in business,
right? The idea that the United States
cannot compete against that with like
mostly or fully automated solar panel
manufacturing in United States which has
cheaper natural gas by far abundant oil,
abundant human resources, great
financial capacity, you know,
worldleading automation, etc., etc. It's
crazy. Like we could literally copy
paste solar manufacturing factors.
>> How much additional solar power capacity
do you think we could be putting on
that's manufactured in the US by 2028?
>> This is a good question. When Russia
invaded Ukraine, I thought, "Ah, finally
the Europeans will see sense and they'll
like pull the trigger on like we need to
localize production of solar panels from
dirt to the finished module, which is
like roughly a fourstage process."
>> Um, they didn't. Uh, so they're still
paying Russia like a billion dollars a
day for the privilege of being invaded,
but at the time I thought they could
probably do that in about 2 years. And I
think the United States could probably
do that in 2 years or less if you
started today. Like it's currently
11:00, so like we're going to start
cutting checks by noon. Um and and yeah,
I think you could you could ramp up
pretty quickly. A lot of technology
already exists here. It's not like it
has to be re invented from scratch. It's
mostly a case of like putting in phone
call to all the different manufacturers
here in Germany and so on and saying we
need you to 10 exercise your factory
starting today. Blank check go.
>> Right. I guess a lot of your predictions
seem to be not predictions, but more
like if we had World War II levels of
motivation, if we had Manhattan level
project level intensity around doing a
specific thing, how fast could we do it?
Um, which is like an Elon like if Elon
was running the government, how fast
could it happen versus
>> it was for for a brief period. Maybe
maybe then we should put it like if Elon
ran the government like he ran SpaceX as
opposed to the question of like okay
what is actually practically likely to
happen given that we are not treating it
with World War II level intensity. So if
you look at XAI, which Elon is involved
in obviously, what are they actually
focused on right now, right? They're
focused on the chips, right? Because
they understand like the key bottleneck
is the chips, not the solar power,
right? Because even if Trump puts in a
200% tariff on Chinese solar, right? And
we're not able to bypass it via like
Vietnam or something, it's still a
bargain. It doesn't matter. Like if you
if you need solar to run your data
center, it's it doesn't hurt on in terms
of overall cost picture. It doesn't
matter at all. What matters is having
the chips at like competitive
capabilities per chip and enough of them
you know installed in your PCBs in your
data centers hooked up to liquid cooling
ready to go right and that's actually
something that that you know Elon and
his companies are great at. It's like
figuring out this mass production
semi-automated mass production. They've
got this um facility in Texas which is
making the um Starink receivers
completely automated. Like at what point
does like oh we don't have a solar panel
factory become on the critical path,
right? I very much doubt it's ever going
to be on the critical path. There's
dozens and dozens of manufacturers of
solar panels worldwide that are all
competing against each other.
>> So you're a big solar bull. Um right now
the hyperscalers are making decisions
about the data centers that they're
building that are going to be 1 gawatt 2
gawatt or in meta's case 5 gawatt how
they're going to be actually powered
>> and the people with actual money on the
line are choosing natural gas and it's
not like they can't see the learning
rate and the I mean they are building
things which will be online in 28 or 30
or something. Mhm.
>> So why are they wrong and you're right?
>> I mean it's their job. They probably
know more about it than I do. But no, in
all seriousness, if you're like Xi right
now trying to build Colossus One data
center in downtown Memphis, right?
>> You want to get it done super fast. So
you're like, what are all the different
things we need? What are the factors of
production to build this? We need a
building. Well, we don't have time to
build a building. We'll buy a building.
Okay, we'll adapt it. Uh we need power.
We need thermal cooling. That stuff you
can deliver on a truck. So that's what
they did. Need access to gas. They had
access to gas there. They could tap into
a local gas line. And actually, if you
can tap into a gas line, generally
speaking, you can get enough power like
the trans the energy transmission
capacity of like your regular gas
delivery pipelines is way way higher
than electricity overhead lines and it's
easy to upgrade or or whatever. And so
if you're in the situation right now,
you say, well, you know, are we
constrained by our ability to go and
rent gas turbines? And no, they're not
because there was enough available once,
maybe twice, right? But at a certain
point, you realize, well, as as you
grow, you start to touch all these
additional constraints. Um and some of
those constraints include gas
availability. So there's a lot of chat
about doing this in Pennsylvania for
example where there's quite a lot of
stranded gas in parts of Texas. Um but
at the same time United States is
gearing up in its ability to export
natural gas overseas. So you the price
will not be infinitely low forever. Um
you you start to run into constraints
around turbine manufacturing rate around
transformer you know transformer
production rate around grid capacity.
Um, and and also kind of running into
problems where where the AIs and and the
humans who depend on like kind of legacy
electricity uh production and delivery
utilities are kind of competing with
each other. We just saw this recent um
Ford auction in PJM result in um in like
kind of very high like unsustainably
high prices for for consumers who depend
on cheap electricity to like you know
heat and cool their houses and have
general prosperity. So, so if you kind
of look far enough in the future, you
say, well, you know, you can just turn
up the dial arbitrarily high, like you
can say, well, we're going to put in a
gigawatt a year. Well, we can we can
meet that constraint with gas turbines,
right? We're not going to run out of
natural gas at 1 gawatt per year
indefinitely. Okay, what if we're doing
5 gawatts per year? What if we're doing
50 gawatts per year? What if we're doing
100 gawatt per year? Like, you can you
can just break the situation.
>> Does that make sense? Um, not to reach
prematurely for analogies, but but like
Henry Kaiser set up the uh shipyard in
in Richmond just down the road here in
San Francisco over near Berkeley. Um,
and uh, initially making ships for the
British and then by the end of the war,
four separate shipyards operating in
parallel to the point where like he was
bottlenecked on his supply of steel
because steel was rare enough in the war
cuz everyone was using it for different
things that Kaiser Industries went off
and built not only a steel mill but also
a steel mine, right? They went and
started digging rocks out of the ground
to turn into ships. Right. And there's
the same sort of situation you have here
where these these massive industrial
verticals and here I'm quite bullish on
XA in particular because the Elon
Cinematic Universe has just done so much
industrial stuff compared to you know
the Googles and Metas of this world can
kind of reach all the way through down
into primary material supply if they
need to.
>> The reason that these current plans are
being done based on natural gas is that
this is a sort of like
>> PGM has all kinds of different sources
of power, right? They have nuclear as
well. They have gas. They have coal. All
kinds of stuff.
>> And actually, this this price here is is
probably driven more by the delivery
cost growth than by the generation cost
growth, if that makes sense. So, when
you pay your utility bill, the cost is
sometimes broken down by like a delivery
cost and a generation cost. Uh sometimes
importation cost and things. And so the
delivery cost is the cost of, you know,
basically what it costs the utility to
build and maintain all the power lines
that connect all the houses to all the
power plants in some gigantic area
divided by your marginal usage with all
kinds of other complicated rules
designed to make it fairer. And the
problem that we see and you know the
reason that PG& here in California for
example is perpetually on the brink of
bankruptcy is that even though like the
cost of additional solar panel or
additional wind turbine or additional
gas turbine or whatever is relatively
cheap,
>> getting that power to your house is
actually really expensive. Why? Because
you've got, you know, generally like
unionized labor that has to build and
maintain power lines in areas that
already have built up infrastructure. So
you have like multiple collisions,
whether this is like a power pole on
your own street or like building new
transmission line which requires you to
like eminent domain land. So you're in
court for like years and years and years
spending public money litigating against
other people who are also spending
public money to litigate against you on
behalf of other interest groups and so
on and so forth. And then you've got
wildfires and and it's just
>> um just like it's like the poster child
for balostases. So one of the reasons
that like we're going to see large scale
pruning of these grids is that we just
can't afford under our current
regulatory regime to maintain.
>> When you say pruning are just like every
everything will just go off grid.
>> Well, I mean it's fairly clear to me
that for really like large captive loads
like data centers or or aluminum
refineries or whatever,
>> you're going to have to build your own
power plant for them, which is how it
used to work. Like if you if you had an
aluminum plant back in the day, you
would be building your own power plant
for it as well. seems inefficient to
have redundant power plants at every
single industrial.
>> Let me paint a grand vision for you. Um
it would seem inefficient but but
actually like if you are sensitive to
the cost of power expressed maybe in
like supply elasticity or something like
that. You just have to do it. There's no
two ways about it. Like um is it
inefficient for the XIA Colossus data
center to have its own captive power
plant which it does right on the backs
of a bunch of trucks?
>> Yeah.
>> In their parking lot.
>> No, it's not inefficient. It's It's the
cheapest way of them for them to get
power.
>> Okay. But big picture question across
different kinds of ISOs like from Texas
to Pennsylvania to whatever.
>> Um people are building data centers
which will not be online for many years
>> and they're choosing natural gas. What's
going on?
>> Well, I think they, you know, we haven't
completely exhausted the supply of
turbons relative to GPUs.
>> And do do you have some estimate of when
we'll run out of because we can also
make more. Well, I think everything
before about 2030 is spoken for at this
point. Yeah, you could make more
turbons. Um,
>> the funny thing is like
>> it's actually relatively expensive, I
think, to like spool up additional
production of of these turbines, for
example.
>> So, so actually here's one here's one
thing you have to grapple with sooner or
later. Conventional power generation is
a steam engine.
>> Right.
>> Right. So, you you have um some kind of
chemical that you find inside the earth
that is out of chemical equilibrium with
the atmosphere and you burn it and makes
heat.
>> It could be coal, could be gas, oil.
>> You hear me? There birds and bees here.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And it makes heat and you
boil water and the water goes through
some kind of mechanical contrivance that
creates motion and then that motion
twists a magnet and generates an
electrical field which then pushes
electrons down wires which then push
electrons through a series of gates that
then approximate thinking.
>> It's kind of kind of complicated. Um but
but the key the key step uh in this
which is converting heat into
electricity in the most efficient most
common this is the same if it's a
nuclear plant or a gas plant combined
cycle plant or or a coal plant or
whatever is what's called a braen cycle.
Um a jet engine on an aircraft is braen
cycle as well and just anytime you have
a braen cycle with like a bunch of in
canels spinning at high speed it's just
going to cost you like a bunch of money.
>> Sorry because there's this inherently
inefficient or what?
>> It's just inherently expensive to build.
>> Okay. What is the cost of so um like G
makes these 100 megawatt gas turbines,
right?
>> Yeah, I guess. Yeah. I don't actually
know what the retail price is. I would
suspect that if their prices is um
flexible, it would have gone up a lot.
But I if I recall correctly, it's like
35 bucks a megawatt hour is just the
flag for cost for
>> how much right?
>> 35 bucks a megawatt hour just for just
for the braen cycle, right? So we're not
talking about the fuel. We're not
talking about the heat exchanges. We're
not talking about, you know, the cooling
ponds or you know, anything like that.
uh just just the amotized cost of the
high-speed high temperature spinning
components is 35 bucks a megawatt hour.
>> Do you think the hyperscalers are being
irrational or do they have some reason?
>> Well, to be clear, they don't care about
cost on for cost of power. This is this
seems extremely like this very
counterintuitive. So for like grandma
kettle in Pennsylvania, she's very
sensitive to electricity cost and we
don't really want her to like suffer in
her retirement from
>> unaffordable electricity costs and like
having to sit there shivering like
that's not the image that we want. At
the same time like what is the what is
the economic value to you of using I
don't know claude or gro or whatever you
use like on a monthly basis
>> but like it's obviously much more than
the subscription but like is it like 10
times more than the subscription maybe?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Let's say so let's say the
subscription is on the order of 10
bucks. The value is on the order of 100
bucks. No actually probably like
100,000. How much does it cost XAI or
Anthropic or whatever to serve
>> the marginal variable cost of like
serving it? Like in electricity is like
less than 10% of the actual cost of uh
>> well their cost of serving it is is like
maybe a buck per million tokens or
something like that and the cost of
electricity is about 10% of that. So
it's like 10 cents of electricity is
generating $1,000 worth of economic
value. Right? So it's very obvious that
Anthropic could be like our electricity
cost base has increased by a factor of
>> and now instead of paying 10 cents on
your $100 bill for for powering you I'm
paying 10 bucks right so we're putting
your your your uh your subscription up
to $110 for electricity capacity charge
>> right and then they could go out and buy
turbines for prices that would make your
eyes water
>> okay so um then why are we going to get
the solar future like in 2032 we're
going to have hundreds of gaws of extra
demand for data centers and at that
point most of it's coming from solar and
why is that?
>> Well, you just there aren't enough
turbines being being manufactured,
>> right? But also I think um in the early
2000s if you we can probably overlay the
graph of like how many turbines are
being manufactured. Like right now we're
at a historical
>> they've ramped up basically to like the
early 2000s, right? Again,
>> but I don't know you had to make more
solar panels as well, right? Like there
will be uh supply elasticities for both
solar and natural gas. Is there some
reason to think that it's worse for the
supply chain involved in having a
natural gas powered data center than a
solar?
>> Yeah, I do. Um the learning rate for for
natural gas is nowhere near as cheap as
solar which just tells you that it's
easy to make solar panels. Much easier
to make solar panels. There are actually
very few manufactured products which are
easier to make. Like the learning the
learning the uh the right solar
coefficient is 43%. So every time we
double [__] production we get a 43%
reduction in cost. And what is the basis
of um like why are we finding 43% worth
of things that can be made cheaper or
more efficient every single year?
>> Well, I mean roughly speaking, there's
like 10,000 manufacturing process
engineers working on this full time,
>> right? That that could be true of any
process, right? But no other processes
uh the kinds of learning
>> true um
>> that solar is seeing.
>> Yeah. So in order to like sustain this
over a long period of time, you
obviously need to have like demand
elasticity that exceeds like your
learning rate. Yeah. Right. So, so
otherwise you would after you know a
couple of booms you would you would
saturate your market at the current
price and you'd have no additional
growth. But in this case like
>> you know every roughly every two years
we're doubling production two two two
and a half years doubling production the
price is coming down by a factor of 40
40 o% so like roughly 20% 15 20% per
year
>> and then just as a result of that price
reduction
>> demand skyrockets by like probably six
times more than that additional marginal
capacity like production capacity
increase
>> and this is one point where I'll say
actually the pros so-called pros are
definitely wrong. Conventional wisdom is
like, "Oh, solar demand is going to
saturate like this this week. It's going
to it's going to saturate. We've got a
graph here somewhere that's like this
year is it. It's never going to grow
anymore." And instead, this just like
blasting out the top of the graph. And
uh this conventional wisdom is wrong. It
is not only the case that solar
adoption, production, price decreases
are continuing. They're accelerating.
And the rate that they're accelerating
is still accelerating. Right.
>> Wait, sorry. The rate that it's
accelerating is accelerating.
>> Yes.
as measured in the total fraction of
energy that's coming from solar or
>> in the sense that it's fitness for the
markets that it is being produced for is
increasing over time. So it is is still
extremely early,
>> right? We're still at like the Apple 2
computer era.
>> Backing up if the story is that the
reason solar is getting cheaper is
because there's a lot of demand for um
more solar and that demand can sustain
economies of scale or whatever is going
on. Yes, I'm going to go on limb here
and like agree with Elon Musk on this.
>> Then shouldn't that also be true of
gas turbines and transformers and power
stations and whatever else that's
required for the um the non-solar
future? Cuz like even there we're
expecting AI to drive up demand for
power regardless of the source. So to
the extent of story for solar becoming
cheaper over time is just that like well
demand will go up and that will drive
efficiencies. Why why isn't that true
for
>> Well, let's say you're a bank and you're
trying to decide whether to lend I don't
know like g a bunch of money to like
expand production of um of their gas
turbons.
>> Yeah.
>> You can you can write them the check
today and then they'll start scaling up
their factories and then they'll you
know they'll start to see the benefits
that in three or four or five years.
Right.
>> Right.
>> You don't know if the AI bubble will
have burst by then.
>> You don't know if China will have
invaded Taiwan by then.
>> You don't know if Seammens or Phillips
or someone will have outco competed you,
>> right? You don't know if G's like major
looming structural problems will cause
it to be unable to compete as it has in
the past. You you also don't know like
in order to make that money back, you
have to then operate that plant at that
capacity for 20 years, right? And if I
was looking at the same charts as
they're looking at right now, I'd say
what are the odds that in 25 years time
we can produce gas turbines at a price
that is relevant in a world where solar
is already at its current price and
batteries at a price where they're
already like you cannot win. I feel like
there was actually a similar discussion
a couple years back or a year back uh
when AI people were like no AI is real
this is going to happen and then SK high
Samsung etc like we're not ramping up
HBM production because like oh HBM is
used largely for AI workloads and if
this demand doesn't continue then our
manufacturing additional manufacturing
capacity for HBM will not have been
worth it and then there was another
bottleneck with co-op
>> what happened after that did they end up
indeed ramping up their production
>> I think so
>> well so When someone says we can't do
it, we won't do it. No way, no how. Not
in the US.
>> What they're saying is, "Write me a
check."
>> Right.
>> Right. And they did. And now Samsung's
coming on board in the States to build
T6 with XAI, I think. So like they all
got there in the end.
>> Maybe maybe it's worth going into the
numbers. Right. So right now 43% of US
data center power consumption is from
natural gas. And basically you think
asmtoically that will be like 100%
solar. If you go to like 2040.
>> Yeah. So I mean obviously like legacy
production coal and stuff is going to
retire over time right um and and if a
gas plant is still making money people
will keep operating it
>> but but at certain point like it is the
case right now that operating a coal
plant costs more than building a new
solar plant so it's just cheaper to
>> so yeah I want I want to know what the
>> and then obviously capacity is going to
increase a lot so that helps to dilute
the existing production
>> and and also the um the amount of use is
going to increase a bunch right like the
the amount of like data center use of
energy will just be
>> yeah exponentially higher. So the the
new stock matters a lot as compared to
the existing stocks. Anyway, so I I want
to know 2027 what fraction is natural
gas 2030 what fraction is uh natural gas
versus solar
>> for for new load or or for uh for new
load
>> for new load
>> 2035 etc. Basically like okay if
eventually you're right that we'll pave
the earth and solar panels to sustain
our quadrillions of AI souls what what
is that what is the pace of that?
>> Well I think the question to ask is like
what is the what is the major constraint
on that ramp up? Right. Right. And then
everything else will just draft in
behind.
>> Um, and I suspect that the hardest thing
to make will always be the the silicon
like the um the GPUs.
>> Right. So the question is really how how
quickly does TSMC ramp up its production
of GPUs? And that's a question for you,
not for me.
>> Um, I I'll I'll just use some numbers
that AI 2027 used for their compute
forecast, which even if you don't buy
their singularity thing, I think they
did a reasonably good job with crunching
the numbers on their compute forecast.
And I think they said there's on the
order of 10 million H100 equivalents in
the world today. And I think they said
by 2028 there would be 100 million.
>> Mhm.
>> So basically 10x more H100 equivalents
in the world.
>> About a kilowatt each, something like
that.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So it's like 100 g,
>> right? Okay.
>> And that's that's Yeah. I mean that that
sounds roughly right. Um you're not the
first person to give me a call and ask
me about this. I'll put it that way. I'm
not going to name names, but like pretty
much all the names you've heard of have
given me a call and said like we know
that you're a minority voice on the
paper that came out recently with scale
micro grids talking about how you could
do 90% solar 10% gas and I said you can
go all the way 100% solar. I wrote a
blog post about it and so they always
call me up and say what about this and
they're all talking like 5 GW in the
next few years. So and that's just like
90 plus% solar for just those. So I
think within a few years we'll probably
see that like the majority of new DCs
that are going in will be mostly solar
>> within sorry how long
>> let's say by let's see what's 2027
majority of new DCs going in at that
point would be most
>> as in like new uh
>> as in groundbreaking at that point
>> if you're groundbreaking 27 you're
probably like planning it now right?
>> Oh that that's why they're calling me.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> my consulting fees are extremely
affordable.
Um,
>> but I really I I don't have deep
visibility because I'm not in the same
room with like
>> with the meta people as to like when
we're going to hit the wall on
transformers and when we're going to hit
the wall on like just how much like
municipal like peak peak load can we
shave off um which is the latest thing
that's been doing the rounds which it
turns out like there's a handful of of
places in the United States and by
handful I mean like literally handful um
where like there might have used to be
an aluminum smelter there's a bunch of
like latent capacity in the grid and
there's also a bunch of generators on
the grid that are notionally turned down
and they're like operate at say 40 50%
capacity factor,
>> but they max out at about 80% capacity
factor cuz you got to bring them down
for maintenance pretty often, right?
Especially if they're old. Um, and so
they're saying, well, you know, we could
pay you just to like operate this old
coal plant or something at higher
capacity. It'll go down this power line
to this place where the smelter used to
be. We'll set up there and then we
promise to like curtail when you need
the power,
>> right?
>> Which basically means they just have
like a massive captive battery plant as
well, which is fine. You just buy that
and arrives on a truck. The major
advantage to doing that over the pure
solar play is that the power is already
there. So there's no risk there. There's
no and then you don't need a massive
amount of land. Like the problem with
the solar approach is that there's no
two ways about it. It it's just it's a
farming operation. You need a huge
amount of land, right? The total amount
of land that you're using less than 1%
is uh under batteries, under roads,
under data center structures, etc., etc.
It's mostly solar.
>> Right. Okay. So, let's get into what
this um if you've got a 5 gawatt plant
you want to build.
>> Yes.
>> Break down the numbers for me in how
much land in terms of solar do you need
to farm this out and especially I was
talking to somebody in this space and
they said look the big problem is not
obviously cost for the cost of energy
for these data centers is a small
fraction of the total cost and most of
the cost is going towards chips. So then
the issue is just can you can you make
the energy available and they were
saying even those solar panels
themselves you can acquire the issue is
getting that much contiguous land and
getting the permitting to interconnected
or whatever the word is is like
apparently a big hassle. Y
>> um
>> it's kind of a nightmare.
>> Yeah. And so they're like, "Well, at
that point, is it actually easier than
just getting on the grid or uh but yeah,
what's your like you need tens of
thousands of acres of solar, where can
you do that without and get like
>> basically in Texas? I mean, or like
>> there's this very popular misconception
that like there's not enough land to do
solar. Right.
>> Right. This is garbage. If you've ever
flown in an aircraft in the United
States and you've ever looked out the
window, you'd be like, "Oh, wow. Look,
there's a lot of land you could put
solar on, especially west of like 110."
>> Yeah. Right.
>> Does it need to be flat or No.
>> No.
doesn't matter.
>> Um, like do trees grow on mountain
slopes?
>> So, it doesn't matter.
>> Um, and the total amount of land. So,
just for reference, Nevada is something
like 80 million acres or something like
that. So, just Nevada, which is like 90%
federal land, is 80 million acres.
>> And uh I would I would never say that we
should we should sacrifice Nevada to the
AI and uh and pave the entirety of
Nevada from one wall to the other. But I
just saw a bunch of things in my feed
the last couple of days that like, you
know, Vegas is is falling apart and
>> really
>> well like no one the boomers are
retiring. No one goes there anymore. Um
people would go to see like the 100
million acres of solar. Yeah. Okay. So 5
G plant. So
>> So even if you did it in Nevada,
>> we can do it anywhere. You can do it
anywhere you can find the land, right?
People say, "Well, you can't do this in
Europe because Europe doesn't have solar
power." Europe has solar power. I've
been to Europe in summer. It's like
sunny for like 20 hours of the day. It's
a bit seasonal, right? But that's not a
big deal. Well, I mean it is if because
you because energy is a small fraction
of the cost, you care more about making
sure the chips are running all the time,
right?
>> Yeah. So, in practice, what happens is
let's say Europe hypothetically like
awakens from its slumber and decides it
wants to participate in AI. Okay. I hope
it does. Uh they say, well, we're going
to have to put, you know, 100 gawatt
down of solar at some point to build
these data centers. It most likely be in
southern Europe. Spain is not
particularly heavily populated. That's a
great place to start. So, we put in 100
g of solar uh solar data center in
Spain. Um, and then in order to achieve,
you know, basically if you're spending
like AI hyperscaling money on your GPUs,
you want to have like 49 of uptime in
order to
>> maximize your like tokens per dollar
spent.
>> Okay? Uh, tokens per dollar spent on the
entire project, not just on that.
>> Uh, this is a very subtle point. I can
go into vast detail on it later on
maybe, but let's just say you need 49s
up time. In order to achieve 49's opime
in like the middle of winter, you need
to have a lot of solar overbuilt, right?
Is solar overbuilt a bad thing? No. Is
the fact that we produce 40% more food
than we need a bad thing? No. It's much
better than producing 40% less than we
need. Okay? And it just means that
effectively you have a giant captive
power plant attached to a data center
that 99.9% of the time produces more
power than it needs and 99% of the time
produces much more power than it needs.
And that can now actually be the source
of power that the local utility instead
of being like naughty naughty data
center you must disconnect uh when we
tell you to they say hey data center I
notice you've got like a bunch of power
you're not using 360 days of the year.
Would you mind ever so much if we threw
a power cable over the wall and we
powered our entire town off your spare
power at like essentially zero marginal
cost plus you know whatever residential
batteries that we need in addition to
local power supply.
>> Yeah. Brian Pard had a good analogy in
his blog post about this where he's
like, I don't know, my MacBook has a
terabyte of storage
>> and I use like 100 gigabytes and I just
got the terabyte version because it's
cheap enough and I might need it at some
point that it's worth it. And so you're
seeing solar get get so cheap that it's
it's the way we'll treat hard drive
space. they get a bunch of excess
>> but also like the the the market will be
made at the the place like the the new
the new marginal like consumption and
production
>> right so like
>> all the people who are working in the
space right now are like oh I'm in I'm
in the business of delivering power or
storing power I'm going to serve the AI
market because that's where all the
growth is occurring right
>> that's where all of us GDP growth is
occurring right now that's basically
>> I guess you didn't answer the question
of yes theoretically we could do
But is it going to be possible to get
the permitting to have tens of thousands
of acres of contiguous?
>> It doesn't need to be contiguous. Well,
I mean, it helps if it's contiguous. It
doesn't need to be convex. Um, so this
is, you know, you can have a bit over
here and a bit over there, and you can
wire them together relatively easily. In
fact, in the limit,
>> in the limit, you have fields upon
fields of solar arrays with
>> Tell me your dream, Casey.
>> Okay. Fields just just solar arrays as
far as I can see. And then within the
solar arrays, roughly in the middle of
them, you have your your batteries and
your
>> I play factorial. I remember this.
>> Okay,
>> I remember this optimal layout of like
batteries and
>> your batteries and you've got your data
centers. So in terms of ground like
floor area, you know, it's roughly let's
say 10% um racks, 10% access to the
racks, um maybe like 50% batteries
stacked up on top of each other, and the
rest is cooling. something like that in
terms of what what sits in the in the
like the centralized node, right? And
that could be 100 megawatt or it could
be 10 GW depending on how you want to
scale this. But then all you need to
connect that to the outside world is
like an optical fiber, right? An optical
fiber cable which you can string up on
poles, you can run underground, you
could even use microwave links if you
really wanted to. You could use styling
if you really wanted to. I don't know
what the stalling would be fast enough.
I'm not sure if it's like capacity is
high enough. You could use laser links
if you really needed to.
>> And that's that's it. It's like this
completely self-contained world of like
>> because it's off-grid.
>> Yeah. Of computation that occurs offrid
like on private land somewhere in the
backwoods of Texas where like no one
lives and no one will ever live
>> because it's completely inhospitable to
humans.
>> In terms of the ratios, it's one trend
that was impressed upon me is that the
power density of racks is increasing a
lot.
>> Yes.
>> As the flops per GPU are increasing. So
we've
>> like a megawatt per rack is what they're
heading to now, which just seems bananas
to me. I think it was even more than
that. But yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> So, let's let's get concrete here for a
second. You got let's say you got one
rack and it's 1 megawatt. And I'll leave
the cooling to like someone who
specializes in air conditioners, but
it's it's basically throw air
conditioners at the problem.
>> And then you have batteries. So, in
order to get four 9s of uptime on this,
you need in in South Texas, you actually
need less than this, but let's just say
24 hours worth of of battery storage,
>> right? Because that means it'll get you
through two of the two two bad nights in
a row, basically. Um and uh and actually
it turns out that you can significantly
decrease power consumption with a very
small reduction in overall compute. So
if you if you've got like three really
bad days in a row or something, you can
actually just like you can dial back
your power usage quite a lot without
compromising your inference or or um or
training. Okay, so you got say a Tesla
power wall something like 4 megatt
hours. So one one megawatt rack and then
six Tesla mega packs each of which is
roughly one truckload worth of stuff. So
like one truckload worth of rack and
then like six truckloads worth of
batteries. Uh and then in order to
operate this at an average power of of 1
megawatt, your solar arrays in Texas
would be something like 25% utilization.
So on average, you know, if if the sun
came up every day and the day was the
same length all the time, you would need
4 megawatt of solar arrays, which is
about 4 acres of land. But in practice,
because you're aiming for 4 9 instead of
like 1 9, uh you need an overbuild of
about 2 and 1 half x. So you've got
about 10 acres of solar. Uh so 10 acres
of solar, uh six truckloads of
batteries, one truckload of of um of
data center and some cooling stuff. And
>> for for how big of a
>> one megawatt that's just one megawatt,
right? So 10 acres, 1 megawatt
>> uh kind of situation at um at 49.
>> Yeah. So if you want 5 gawatt and that's
5,000,000 acres
>> times 10. So 50,000 acres and and
actually at larger scale you can get you
can probably cut all those numbers down
by 10 10 20% but like on that order and
like 50,000 acres sounds like a lot. It
does sound like a lot.
>> The amount of land the amount of land
put aside for Oakidge was 100,000 acres.
The amount of land put aside for Hanford
was about 100,000 acres
>> with Hanford.
>> Hanford was where they made the
plutonium in the in the in the Manhattan
project.
>> Okay.
>> I don't know how big that was.
>> About 100,000 acres. Okay. I mean
>> I mean is it like
>> was it like oh this is so small and then
you're like oh but it's 100,000 acres or
>> Well, so the reason they and it's still
largely unpopulated now because it's a
national laboratory. But the reason they
did that was they thought oh we're going
to need four piles to produce plutonium.
These are not um these are not nuclear
reactors that produce exothermal energy.
So you can't actually make nuclear power
with them. But you're making plutonium
with them. Then in the end they only
needed two I think and they wanted them
spaced out cuz they thought like they
might just like spontaneously like
explode and a bunch of other facilities
and plants and stuff as well. Oh, Austin
Vernon had an interesting blog post
where he said that if uh if you allow
for if you have like diesel generators
or something which can take over the
generation for like 10% of the
generation during these you know with
the winter or something
>> uh then you can have a 60% reduction in
the amount of solar panels you need to
install because you don't need to have
you don't need to plan for that
contingency.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So I mean basically there's
a balance here. So this is not a very
complicated optimization problem. Like
for people who do optimization problems
for fun, this is how you do it. You
start off with a bunch of like ENL data
on like what your solar abundance is in
this particular part of the world. Uh
and then you just start throwing solar
panels and batteries at it over like the
course of a one-year simulation until
you hit the number of nines you want,
right? And then you to an extent you can
trade the amount of panels and the
amount of batteries you've got back and
forth and there's like a very very broad
optimum, right? Or you can throw in a
third thing like a diesel backup or a
gas turbine or whatever. The issue here
is look if these if Meta or Microsoft or
whoever just wants to get something off
the off the ground um this might be low
opex to have this huge solar farm but
high capex um where you need to hire
like 30,000 people to go out in the
middle of a desert and install 50,000
acres worth of solar panels. And they're
like why would I not just buy like 50
gas turbines instead? Why don't out bid
like Microsoft or Meta out bids Google
or something for the for the last gas
turbine that's available that year?
Yeah, I mean totally the thing that the
thing that like I think Meta has
realized is like Zuck is running out of
time to spend his money to win. The
capex is not crazy high just to be
clear. Like the capex is still dominated
by just the GPUs.
>> Right.
>> Right. So like how much does 5 gawatt
worth of GPUs cost?
>> I don't know if my numbers will be wrong
but like 250 billion or something.
>> Yeah, 250 billion sounds about right.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, like is 50,000 acres going to
cost $250 billion
>> in Texas?
>> That's so much money. Wait, I I didn't I
did the math
like maybe hundred million hundreds of
millions of dollars, something like
that. So, it's like literally.1% of the
cost is land, right? How much does a
megawatt of solar cost? Well, if you go
and ask the usual suspects, they'll tell
you million dollars. But this is one of
the things that that breaks my brain at
Terraform, which is my day job, which is
that the the modules themselves, if
without tariffs, would be like 8 cents a
watt. So that's like $80,000.
>> 8 cents a watt.
>> Yeah.
>> But they're like a dollar a watt
including insulation and everything.
>> Including installation and everything.
But like
>> the panels are the magic part. They're
the thing that turns sunlight into pure
electrical energy at 25% efficiency.
>> Everything else should be like less than
that. That's what we're If you want to
work on that project, come and work with
us at Terraform cuz we're very
costensitive.
>> We'll give you an opportunity to chill.
Don't worry. Um
>> constantly. Um but uh no in all
seriousness like the the the central
takeaway is that is that the
hyperscalers are not power cost
sensitive they are power availability
sensitive
>> and for all these things you just run
into this like supply elasticity wall
>> at the sort of rates of increase that
we're talking about and and solar is by
far
>> the best option for like fire hosing
energy at a given problem
>> right
>> because it's just it rains down from the
sky
>> if you're running a frontier technology
company, you know how essential it is to
recruit the world's best talent, but
this requires navigating the Byzantine
US immigration system. Not only do you
not have the time to deal with this
yourself, you just don't have the tacet
knowledge to maximize the probability of
success, but given how critical
exceptional talent is, you can't take
any risks with visa approval. You need
to work with the best. Lighthouse
handles everything better and faster
than you possibly could, and they do it
all with minimal input from you.
Lighthouse knows the nooks and crannies
of the immigration machine. They know
how to frame publications and awards or
how to structure comparisons versus
benchmarks and how to put everything
together into the most compelling story
possible. And they've even optimized the
tiny details like the tone they use when
they draft support letters to help US
immigration officials understand the
importance of Tekken startups. Companies
like Cursor, Together AI, and Physical
Intelligence are all already working
with Lighthouse. You can join them by
visiting lighthousehq.com/mp
employers. All right, back to Casey.
Between the fact that the um maybe solar
prices will go down and the fact that
demand is going to go up, do you think
electricity prices are likely to rise?
>> Yes. But electricity prices at this
point are a reflection of a regulatory
irrationality, right? It's the same
situation in Europe and Australia for
that matter. Like your prices will rise
until you've had enough. and you say,
"No, we demand that you allow us to take
advantage of power technology that's
been invented in the last 50 years." In
terms of things that are causing us to
lose to China, tariffs are neither here
nor there because, as we've discussed,
we're not sensitive to cost on power.
But the environmental regulations that
are actively preventing us from
deploying renewable energy in the United
States, like this is the reason Texas is
winning. Texas is out deploying
California 10 to1. The regulatory
environment around solar is just insane.
It's insane. the regulatory environment.
>> Okay, so in the United States, part of
the reason that solar has not been
deployed at massive scale yet is that a
bunch of laws went into into action in
the early 1970s that were intended to
protect our environment. And that makes
a lot of sense and our environment is a
great thing. We should protect it.
>> But how how I mean I think people will
be familiar with NEPA and whatever, but
like how is it especially impacting
solar?
>> Well, let's say you've got a bunch of
private land out in the middle of
nowhere, right? And you want to build it
solar on it.
>> You'll probably end up triggering NEPA,
>> right? At which point you now have to do
what is not in the law but considered
necessary under current regulations
which is like your four-year
environmental impact review which
generates like so much paper that just
the environmental impact of producing
the report because you have to cut down
trees to make paper is more than the
environmental impact of just deploying
the solar.
>> Mhm.
>> Like this is bonkers. It is crazy town,
right? Uh the thing that drives me
particularly crazy in Southern
California is that just because solar is
kind of new and off-grid solar is very
new, unless you're very very careful,
you end up getting regulated as though
you're trying to build a chemical plant
even though it's a solar array. And the
impact of solar array on desert is
arguably positive because it shades the
ground and improves like soil moisture
retention. Um there like if you wanted
to reverse desertification, you would
basically just deploy solar panels on it
and that would pay for the process. Um,
but you you end up having to go through
more stringent environmental review
process than if you just wanted to like
grade the whole thing and cover it in
concrete
>> or grade it and then park a bunch of
like old rusting cars that are dropping
oil into the aquifer. Right.
>> Right. Which in many cases you don't
need a permit for at all.
>> Right. But to build the solar, you have
to go through this whole process. And
and like if there's one thing that
anyone listening to this can do, it
would be like have a categorical
exemption for solar deployment or or
just like if I put money in escrow
account that says like if after 20 years
we have to pull this out like we'll pull
all the solar out of the desert. It goes
back to being desert, right? I will do
that in a heartbeat. But like if I have
to hire another biologist for $10,000 to
be like, well on that 40acre plot we
found a tuft of grass which we believe
might be a uh a critical, you know, one
of the 20 species that this particular
species of bee uh sometimes eats and the
species of bee is not technically
endangered, but it might be at some
point in the future. Uh therefore you
can't deploy there even though it's like
zoned unrestricted industrial and it's
sandwiched between a rocket test stand
and like a chemical plant for example
>> in an industrial part of the desert. I
will like I'm going to become the Joker.
It is insane. It is like I just think we
need to be a bit balanced about this.
It's like
>> I don't want to like drive species into
extinction, but like the meta problem
here is if we don't move our industrial
stack off fossil fuels in 10 or 20
years, first of all, we'll get poor the
same way you UK did, right? Because they
ran out of coal basically. And the
second thing is we'll get poor because
we'll flood our coastal cities in
Florida underneath climate change.
>> Mhm. Um we need we need solar synthetics
for that part. We also need to do sulfur
injection and a couple of things.
>> People will point out that transmission
line growth has been stuck in a rut for
decades and we have all these
bottlenecks instead of in terms of
substations and um transformers etc etc.
>> Why will this not hamper this uh
abundant solar future?
>> Um that's a really great question. Um,
so actually you and I had a conversation
along these lines almost two years ago
when we first met
>> and um
>> and it it caused me to go and write a
blog post. So
>> um this is this is a good way of
thinking about it.
>> I think there's another blog post you
wrote though which was also our
conversation we had which is how to feed
the AIS.
>> That's much more recent. Yeah, that was
after dinner I think.
>> Um
>> and and to be fair like I usually am
fairly clear in my blog posts if I'm
posting or if I'm serious. Um
>> but uh but this one actually I'm dead
serious on. It's actually the one where
I'm um it's like the most out of the
money bet as well. Like everyone else
that I consider to be like a respectable
forecaster in this area disagrees with
me on it. So that's one side. Um well,
so the grid, we know where the grid's
expensive. It's a lot of wires strung up
in like hard-to-reach places that are
hard to maintain, especially as you
know, the workforce ages and and
regulations and all the rest and eminent
domain and so on so forth. Okay, so
grid's not going to get cheaper anytime
soon or easier to build. And if you look
at the projections of like how much
grid, you know, uh DOE would have us
needing to build in the next 10 years
versus how much actually being built,
it's like it's not even in the same
order of magnitude. So you say, well,
are we totally screwed? The answer is
no, we're not totally screwed because
batteries actually do the same job that
the grid does.
>> But this is kind of weird, so hear me
out.
>> The grid transports power from one place
to another.
>> It transports almost instantaneously at
the speed of light. So it's actually
performing a spatial arbitrage.
>> Right.
>> Right. So, the idea being that right
outside the local nuclear power plant,
power is really cheap because they make
a lot of it. And in your house, power is
really expensive because you don't have
a power plant in your house. Uh, and you
you pay the intermediator a small fee
and they allow this this trade to take
place. Um, and that's basically how the
grid works. And until quite recently,
the only way we had of meaningfully
storing energy, like storing electricity
on the grid was pumped hydro. And that
only works in a handful of places in
limited limited capacity. And it doesn't
work all that well either. the
efficiency is not great. Now we have
batteries. Batteries store power at one
time of day and they release it at
another time of day. So batteries are
performing a temporal arbitrage, an
arbitrage over time,
>> but they can be local or they can be
more remote. I think we'll end up seeing
batteries next to the solar arrays and
batteries in the middle of the grid at
substations and batteries on the sites
of existing power plants that get turned
off and batteries in your house and
batteries everywhere in between. One way
of thinking of this is what is your per
capita allocation of batteries in
kilograms per head and like when you and
I were much younger you know the
lithium-ion battery was in a cell phone
say so you're like I don't know 10 g per
person or something and nowadays half
the people in this town drive Teslas so
your per capita allocation of of
lithiumion battery is 100 kg or
something like that so we're talking
like
>> four or five ohms of increase of total
total battery per person that trend is
only going to continue and then you say
well Okay, we've got batteries that are
performing this temporal arbitrage and
the sun comes up every day, right? So
like the the the power swing from like
midday you're otherwise curtailing the
solar array to dusk when everyone's
watching TV and cooking dinner or
running the air conditioners to cool off
in the evening is very predictable,
right? Whereas like oh we had like
really bad weather so we had to use the
power line that runs to the extra power
plants over by Hoover Dam or something
doesn't get used nearly as much or like
it's it's peak utilization is happens
almost never which means that the
utilization of the batteries is on
average like let's say 300 days a year
and the utilization of your most
expensive grid highest voltage grid
assets is much much lower and that
includes like the trans the substations
and transformers and stuff that serve
that. So, it's a really bad position to
be in if you're a grid operator, right?
Because you've got this this aging
existing thing that the batteries are
cannibalizing. The batteries are being
installed behind the meter. You don't
have a say in whether they're being
installed, how they're being used. All
you know is that your
that your utilization of your asset
where you get to charge top dollar for
it is just dropping year after year
after year after year as the same time
as your operating costs are increasing
year after year after year. So it's just
very clear that like the average
distance the electron is going to travel
between generation and consumption is
going to decrease in the future pretty
radically.
>> Yeah. I guess the
>> it's already decreasing. It's going to
continue to decrease.
>> The difference is that I mean it's
especially helpful for solar, but like
solar is the one that's most
intermittent.
>> You can predict you can predict the
amount of solar power you're going to
get in 3 days pretty accurately because
of weather prediction.
>> But you can't like buy more battery you
can't like change the amount of
batteries you have.
>> Well, actually in the limit you can
because you can put them on trucks and
drive them around,
>> right? So there could be a capacity
market for batteries where you drive
them around to people who need them. In
practice, it's going to be cheaper just
to double the size your battery.
>> Um because batteries are going to get
cheaper and cheaper and cheaper and
cheaper.
>> But what it does mean is you can say
well I know that I'm going to have you
know three low days. So I will start
curtailing now by 5% so I don't have to
cail by 50% in 3 days and then overall
for the whole year I'll only cail you
know 5 hours. So, I'm still at 49s um
instead of having to kale 24 hours
because I can't predict the weather.
>> Okay. So, let's assume you're right. And
then I mean I think at some point you
will be right. Like maybe we disagree
about Sorry, I'm not qualified to
disagree. Maybe you and some other
person might uh disagree about what year
it happens. But I think it's hard to
deny that
>> in the asmtote. Oh yeah. Our
civilization is headed towards lots of
energy used for AI and a lot of that
coming from solar. Um, in that asmtote
I've just like I want to get like the
crazy nerd sci-fi like what does our
civilization look like? What is
happening in this, you know,
>> Chev level one?
>> Yeah. Let's wait till get to turning the
entire earth into an AI factory, but
more like I don't know the 2030s. Um,
>> where you've gotten multiple people who
are building on the order of 5 gawatt or
10 gawatt sites. the value of the
hardware is dependent on its complement
which is the software right like right
now AI models are fine and so the
hardware they're running on the economic
value they can generate is sort of a
bottleneck by how good the software is
but if you actually had AGI if you had
like a human level intelligence or maybe
even better
>> ideally better yeah
>> yeah um running on an H100 uh that H100
is worth a lot right like we're paying a
lot for humans to do work right now I
don't think AI is that valuable like the
models themselves aren't super super
valuable in terms of just pure economic
value, right? OpenAI is generating on
the order of 10 billion ARR or some you
know 20 billion ARR and
>> that sucks. It's terrible. How how can
they sleep at night?
>> I know. Um but like for context,
McDonald's and Kohl's generate more
yearly revenue than that. But I think
the promise of AGI
>> Yeah.
>> is to automate human labor. human labor
generates on the order of 60 trillion
dollars of economic value or like that's
how much is paid out in wages to labor
around the world right so that's what
AGI can do and even if you curtail it to
just white collar work that's still tens
of trillions of dollars of value so once
we have models which are actually human
level
>> they will be worth at least that um
pending the fact that you can build them
>> I don't think we should constrain
ourselves to being like oh well maybe
it'll be some fraction of current
payroll right because like that that's
kind of a very contingent on like humans
being humans thing.
>> Yeah. Know I think it's a lower bound to
be clear.
>> Oh yeah, lower bound for sure. But like
if you think about like someone someone
trying to like estimate the upper bound
for the market value the market cap of
like Caterpillar, right? Based on like
well it takes you know this many men and
like burrows and wheelbarrows to like
dig a trench and so you know it couldn't
be more than that, right? But actually,
you know, one way to think about the
industrial revolutions is every time you
figure out industrial revolution, what
you're doing is you're finding some way
of like bypassing a constraint or
bypassing a bottleneck.
>> And the bottleneck prior to what we call
the industrial revolution was uh
metabolism, right? It's just like how
much like oats can a human or a horse
physically digest and then convert into
useful mechanical output for you know
their their um their peasant overlord or
whatever. And and nowadays we would
giggle to think that like oh the amount
of food we produce is meaningful in the
context of like the economic power of a
particular country right
>> um because 99% of the energy that we
consume routes around our guts you know
through the gas tanks of our cars and
through our aircraft and in our grids
and stuff like that and so right now
>> the AI revolution is about
>> routing around cognitive constraints
that in some ways writing you know like
writing printing press computers the
internet have already allowed us to do
to some extent. Uh a credit card is a
good example of something that routes
around a cognitive constraint of like
building up network of trust, right?
It's a centralized trust.
>> Yeah, that's interesting. It was also
really interesting. Something that came
up uh and I already credited James
Bradbury and Gw with making this
interesting point when I was talking
with them a couple of days ago is if you
measure by GDP, AI's outputs might be
underwhelming. Right? One of the
complaints that economists have about
the internet is that it's hard to
measure the consumer surplus that's
created by the internet because a lot of
the um a lot of the goods and services
that are made available
>> you you pay zero for them and so they
don't show up in GDP.
>> It's the same with oil.
>> Yeah. In that sense that it's only 1% of
energy is like 1%.
>> Oil is like $8 trillion a year or
something, right? But if if you if you
if you said well one day we're going to
consume 100 times more energy in the
form of oil than in the form of food and
the per jewel cost of food is you know
whatever it is the cost of a Big Mac
then oil should be like $800 trillion a
year right it's 100 times like per per
unit energy oil like gasoline is 100
times cheaper than the cheapest food
that humans can digest. So, so, so like
does that mean that we've like shot
ourselves in the foot by using oil to
run our economy?
>> Right.
>> Because it's so cheap like no.
>> Right. Right. And and also the amount
the fra it's fraction of GDP also
doesn't correspond to how important it
is. For example, oil is like 1% of GDP
or something. But um if you don't have
oil, then you have these oil shocks
which cause double digit decreases in
GDP. So the elasticity of demand often
matters more than it's like raw fraction
contribution to GDP. But anyways on the
original point about AI. So you're going
to have this huge deflation of
so Gordon put it this way. He's like if
um if you imagine Dario's data center of
geniuses.
>> Yes.
>> How is that showing up in GDP? Well, it
would be the inputs which are the chips,
the energy, etc. and the outputs which
are just the tokens. And neither of
those is going to be that astronomical
in comparison to the value those that
data center of geniuses is producing. Um
so in terms of GDP numbers like if that
data center of geniuses automates a
bunch of um or at least complements a
bunch of human work etc it might
actually cause like a nominal decrease
in GDP while at the same time
contributing massively to um what we
might think of as the valuable stuff
humanity or human civilization can
produce. And so in the long run, uh it
might make more sense to think of the
size of our economy or the size of our
civilization as the raw energy use that
we do rather than GDP because again GDP
will see this huge deflation because the
variable cost of running AI
>> will just be pretty cheap um as compared
to like paying humans wages etc. I think
I think when the where at at the point
where like you've got a mixed economy
with like an AI doing my job and also a
human doing my job.
>> I love how this is this is the new way
we use the phrase mixed economy.
>> Yeah. Then obviously like I still have
some pricing power relative to humans
and the AI thus has pricing power,
right?
>> But but if it was the case that like a
new um a new kind of job emerges that AI
is really well adapted to
>> like the because it's not competing
against humans for most of those roles,
it would be competing against the other
labs, right? And so you'd actually see
like the cost pushed down to, you know,
a mult a small multiple of whatever the
marginal production cost of those tokens
is. That would be my guess. So I I think
I think it might be a mistake to assume
that like, well, if if we're going to
pay, you know, a top AI researcher
$200,000
$200,000 a year, lol. Um, let's say the
sort of AI researcher that I could be,
$200,000 a year, that if uh an AI comes
along that's as good as me at that, even
taking into account the fact that
realistically speaking, I only get, you
know, maybe 10 hours of really top
cognitive work done a week, that it
would also be worth $200,000, right?
Obviously, it's
>> it'd be worth much more than that in in
the sense of like you can copy paste its
output and much less than that in the
sense that, you know, whatever the
marginal additional cost of of spooling
up H100s is. Um and so if some if some
kind of role comes along that like the
AIS are really well specialized at and
out compete the humans quickly then we'd
also expect to see that there um both
the the cost of providing that service
to drop drastically at the same time as
the overall value generated in the
economy by that service would increase a
lot.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Um if we think that the
value of cognition is going to be
unbounded and the way to derive
cognition, you can just to the extent
you think solar will eventually win, you
can just you can derive it from how much
land it takes to power an H100 using
solar panels. That is a very interesting
derivation that like okay well this is
at a minimum we're going to just fill up
all the land. I mean at some point you
might have like declining marginal value
of cognition or something but
>> we kind of discussed this earlier but if
you have like a megawatt of um 10 acres
10 acres of of land feeding one megawatt
H100 or something is generating like
let's say a megawatt is a thousand
humans. So one acre is 1,000 humans
worth of
>> right
>> cognition. The implicit land value there
is a lot higher than it is as like
undeveloped desert
>> right? It's also a lot higher than it is
as like the most productive farmland
that humanity has ever had. Right.
>> At current hardware efficiencies, I
don't know if it's worth spelling out.
>> Basically, H100 has the same amount of
flops as a human brain, but also uses
way more energy than a human brain. Uh,
it uses like 50x more energy.
>> Is that right?
>> So, 20 watts versus 1,00 watts.
>> Human brain like 20 watts. Yeah, it
could be.
>> We know hardware can be at least as
efficient as the human brain. And the
human brain can generate this many flops
on 20 watts.
>> Yeah. So if you do that calculation,
>> then that's 50x 10,000. So 50,000
>> y
>> AI souls off of
>> and it could easily be much more than
that because neurons are much slower
>> than than um transistors obviously. Um
so probably 10 years ago, one of my
friends reminded me um you know like the
way your phone saves power is it goes to
sleep between you like tapping out hello
like H goes it takes a nap for like
10,000 cycles. Hey, you know
>> um it's kind of nuts. So just like
humans I think Elon's talked about this
in the context of self-driving cars as
well which is like anything humans do is
like slowpect of a computer.
>> Let's actually go back to the point of
like I was explaining why I think it's
plausible that there could be more than
hundreds of gigawatts of extra demand
from AI in the 2030s. I want to
understand what that looks like in the
real world. Like at that point has
become basically this industrial problem
of can you generate enough solar panels
and solar modules and batteries and not
to mention the chips themselves.
>> That's the industrial point and then
there's a cultural point as well which
>> let's start with the industrial point.
>> Um I I I want I want to know what the
year 2035 looks like if if we've got AGI
and we're just bottlenecked by the
ability to deploy it.
>> Yeah. So you can ask a question like
what do you need in order to run like
what is the minimum amount of matter
that you need in order to perform this
these calculations. So so so right now
we talking about like racking and grid
and transmission and a bunch of like
ISOs and all that rest. You don't need
any of that stuff right and like
>> obviously Xa is on top of this because
the first thing that Elon will always
ask is like delete anything you don't
absolutely need. Um, so what you
actually need is a big slab of
relatively cheap silicon to make the
power and then a small slab of
relatively expensive silicon to do the
thinking.
>> And if it's in space, that's all you
need, right? Cuz it's in the sun all the
time. So you don't need a battery,
right? But if you're on the earth, you
need a battery as well. So you need some
interconnects. Um,
>> and you don't need a transformer, right?
You don't even need a DCDC converter.
You can actually make do with buck
converter or with relays or whatever to
basically match the the current output
of your solar array with the charge
state of your batteries. and the power
consumption of the u of your you know uh
GPU or something but like a solar array
about the size of this desk for example
will generate about 500 watts in in in
full sun. So you could actually imagine
like aliens who have different silicon
technology stack building their systems
as like an integrated solar array with
you know a bit of uh a bit of you know
comput
>> uh on the same wafer but that's that's
basically all you need and then
>> on the same wafer that's because it's
all silicon.
>> It's all silicon. It's all silicon all
the way down. What's silicon made of?
Well, it's it's an element. It's
chemically in the crust. Uh there's no
shortage of it.
>> This is a great prompt for a sci-fi
exercise cuz if especially in space, you
don't need batteries. So, you just like
the the prompt is uh the the future TSMC
just manufactures integrated solar uh
>> and they can fly around, right? They're
solar cells, right? And they don't
they're they're relatively dense, so
they don't fly crazy fast. They don't
need to because they're
>> Is this what we're made of, Casey? Is it
just is going to be competentium at the
center of
>> They can fly closer to the sun to get
more power. Right.
>> Right. up to their thermal limit and
they can fly further from the sun to go
and explore or like fly other planets or
something and they can they can adjust
the orientation of the solar sail with
LCD panels that it could be integrated
into the
>> into the wafer itself. So I mean that's
that's actually if you say what's the
what's the posthuman state that's it you
know like that's we will we will
eventually
>> solar sail with a silicon die in the
middle for
>> one human's worth of of computation one
human brain you know can be simulated
and roughly a square meter of silicon
floating in space
>> how how much are
>> one square meter of silicon like like
the thickness of a sheet of paper
floating in space that's a future human
form that's that's my final form
>> that's it state yeah that's assuming
that's assuming a little bit of software
improvement but like I don't think
that's
>> all that's assuming
software improvement. Um the Dyson spear
that's all it needs a little bit of soft
a little bit of tweaking on the other.
>> I mean if if the soft like the the area
of the panel you know is kind of the the
variable there right
>> um so you can ask well what what do you
need in order to make the silicon making
uh solar arrays making chips. It's kind
of multi-stage process but but basically
you start off with uh silica silicates
which are rocks ideally in a relatively
pure form. you uh chemically reduce
them. Um a couple of different processes
that can do that and then purify them
into like ideally like 69s of purity for
solar array or maybe nines for like
really nice computers. Um silicon purity
and uh grow crystals cut wafers etc etc.
So then then the constraint is like well
how quickly can you convert the crust
into enough silicon to support you know
silicon thought?
>> Yeah.
>> Um what does the silicon ecosystem look
like?
>> Any thoughts?
>> Well it's it's pretty quick right? Like
if you like how many if you're like 1
kilowatt per square meter and then you
use that just to like rip oxygen off the
underlying dirt you know it doesn't take
all that long to you need about 20
microns of silicon to make solar PV
array
>> so like from dirt as you mean like
actual dirt
>> yeah actual dirt has plenty of silicon
in it so for example setting up a brand
new silicon refinery takes about 18
months
>> right
>> right um but that's just with the
current technology right there I I
actually think
we may find ways so one of the nice
things if you have infinite infinite
free solar power, approximately free
solar power. You can revisit a bunch of
legacy industrial processes that are
have been optimized for efficiency and
say, well, what if we just like use
twice as much power and we just want to
do them faster and cheaper, right? Like
less capex, less lead time, more power,
right?
>> Well, you can start solving problems. It
turns out that um that if you want to
chemically reduce silicon, you can do it
electrolytically like with less
efficiency and a bunch like under a
hydrogen rich atmosphere or something.
And then uh so one of the ways that
silicon can be refined is by turning
into silene which is a silicon
tetrahydride.
>> I'm not really a chemist but I think
that's right. So SiH4 uh which is a gas.
It's like um it's actually like methane
but one down on the periodic table.
>> Um and don't breathe it though. And um
yeah and then and then once it's a gas
you can filter it from all the
contaminants which don't form gases or
can be separated uh by density. Um much
like how uh uranium is sometimes
enriched but much much less difficult.
uh and then uh heat it up to separate it
back into peel silicon where you can
then you know precipitate out a
>> I mean the reason I think this is
interesting is because um whenever
people who are talking about the AI
singularity often their expertise is not
in energy or physics or whatever. So
they focus only on the cognitive
elements of the singularity which is
like how much faster can we make AI
smarter etc. Mhm.
>> I think this is really interesting
because if we have unbounded cognition
which sets up both the ability to supply
and to demand more energy. I'm very
curious like what does the energy
singularity look like? Um where you know
we're just trying to saturate as much
energy that the earth receives and turn
it into cognition. hadn't thought about
that before, but like there's this idea
that like evolution resulted in this
like continual like ramification and
complexification of the thermodynamic
gradient,
>> right? So you start with like very
simple like based organisms now you get
this like industrial economy but it may
be the case
>> and I don't have a strong reason to
suspect one way or the other that like
what we're seeing is like the beginning
stages of a collapse back towards the
simplest possible therm thermodynamic to
cognition stack which is
>> we have fusion in stars
>> and the inky blackness of space and that
provides our our temperature gradient
>> and then the the most efficient way to
convert that into usable cognition is
silicon
>> like literally electrons being pushed
across the fmy gap in a solar array and
then taking the return path through some
like set of gates,
>> right?
>> Making decisions about things and then
like beaming lasers to their friends
saying, "Hey, I just made up a new
meme."
>> That is an interesting concept that for
4 billion years we've been increasing
the sort of like variance in complexity
of creatures and then you might see like
this big collapse. Um should I give you
the opportunity to plug why uh why
people should work for Terraform?
>> Yeah. So actually just to give you an
introduction, Terraform is my day job.
It's a company I founded almost four
years ago. We are making synthetic
natural gas from sunlight and air.
>> We are also working on other core
primary materials stuff. We also have a
a methanol process methanol and methane
together uh
>> precursors to every hydrocarbon you
could possibly want. Uh another chemical
with ammonia processed steel uh
deselination and we can also make cement
and a few other things. So basically
everything that the primary uh primary
industry does except for glass and
paper. We're hiring. Uh our jobs are
available on terraformment
industries.com. Yes, the website's meant
to look like that because we're very
cool. Um we are some very special
people. You know, I know a lot of smart
people and I'm privileged to work with
some of the smartest people I know. We
are mostly mechanical engineers. I will
never hire anyone who can't do math. I
will never have the problem at
astronomer because we don't have a head
of HR. Um
I'm sure
>> and also the CEO is not having an
affair.
>> Yeah. I mean like step one. Um,
>> I think that was a more crucial issue,
Casey.
>> But like heads of HR can get into
trouble. I'm just saying everyone does
math. Um, Terraform, it's very important
to me that Terraform is the place that
ambitious hardware people go to become
the best they can be, right? That is
really important. I'm not it's not here
to like check in and get your paycheck
and like optimize some shiny widget.
It's still a small team. It's still like
one project per person kind of
situation. Um, and I will level you up.
like maybe not quite like Jensen taught
you into greatness kind of situation but
like at times it's going to feel that
way and you get to work with the the
best people that there are at least on
the west coast of the United States on
on this sort of thing and it's also
unique company I thought years ago like
by now I'll have competition we don't no
one else is doing this except for a
small smart start startup in the UK um
and uh and so you know you get on the
ground floor and it's going to be super
cool technology and uh we you know
eventually we get to go and build it all
on Mars as well and like help our robot
overlords make more of themselves out of
dirt. It's pretty cool.
>> Nice.
>> Come come work for us.
>> Casey, thank you so much for coming on
the podcast.
>> Oh, thank you. This
>> is fun.
>> Yeah.
>> I hope you enjoyed this episode. If you
did, the most helpful thing you can do
is just share it with other people who
you think might enjoy it. Send it to
your friends, your group chats, Twitter,
wherever else. Just let the word go
forth. Other than that, super helpful if
you can subscribe on YouTube and leave a
fivestar review on Apple Podcast and
Spotify. Check out the sponsors in the
description below. If you want to
sponsor a future episode, go to
dwarcash.com/advertise.
Thank you for tuning in. I'll see you on
the next one.